---
title: "Exploration of Oxidation Reduction Potential (ORP) as a Process
Parameter to Track Pinot noir Fermentations"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/ASEV-2021-3
excerpt: 'In the wine industry, tracking redox potential, or ORP, during fermentation is an
emerging process parameter. ORP can offer a valuable, real-time indicator of yeast
metabolism during fermentation and could be used to make decisions around aeration
to prevent formation of unwanted compounds associated with reductive fermentation conditions'
date: 2021-06-21
venue: 'ASEV'
#paperurl: 'https://www.mdpi.com/1420-3049/26/16/4748#cite'
citation: 'Gordon Walker, James Nelson, Desmon Hernandez, Thomas Halligan, Andre Knoesen,
and Ron Runnebaum*, ASEV 2021'
---
As part of a larger effort to characterize site-specific contributions in Pinot noir wines,
four sites were selected to examine the relationship between vineyard, must composition, and fermentation dynamics. These vineyards were selected for their replicable
fermentation kinetics and consistent organoleptic properties. The wines were produced from the same clone of Pinot noir and were made using the same enological
process. To gain insight into real-time dynamics of fermentation, oxidation reduction
potential (ORP) probes were used to measure redox potential during alcoholic fermentation. Redox potential determines the type and frequency of chemical half-reactions in solution, including speciation and reactivity of metals. ORP is a quantifiable
metric that responds to changes in pH, temperature, dissolved oxygen, enzymatic
activity, and yeast metabolism in real time. ORP probes are standard for anaerobic
fermentation industries but are not widely used for wine. For a comprehensive view
of the characteristics of these wines, phenolics extraction and elemental composition
were also analyzed. The vineyards were selected to represent faster- and slower-fermenting musts. While vintage variation exists, these sites have displayed robust
trends over five years of vinification. The working hypothesis was that placing ORP
probes into the replicate fermentations would provide insight into yeast metabolic
activity and determine differences in kinetics. The observed fermentation profiles
matched previous vintages, consistent with our expectations. We also observed typical differences in phenolics, anthocyanin extraction, and the elemental profile among
wines (specifically the Fe:Mn ratio). The ORP profiles followed similar trends for all
fermentations, a sign that the temperature-based process control worked effectively. By examining the ORP profiles in detail, deviations in ORP revealed previously
undetectable differences between sites and replicates. ORP is exquisitely responsive
to small perturbations, making it ideal to use a process parameter for monitoring and
controlling fermentations.
