---
title: "Exploring use of Redox Potential to Predict Fermentation Outcomes in
Relation to Initial Juice Conditions"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/ASEV-2021-1
excerpt: 'Each year in the wine industry, economic loss occurs due to stuck or sluggish fermentations and the corresponding off-flavors produced. While monitoring by using
standard methods such as total soluble solids (density) may reveal a problem, often
this occurs after wine quality has already been impacted and remediation techniques
are less effective, more intrusive, and costly'
date: 2021-06-21
venue: 'ASEV'
#paperurl: 'https://www.mdpi.com/1420-3049/26/16/4748#cite'
citation: 'Gita Mallya, Ben Montpetit,* James Nelson, Kimberlee Marinelli, Ron Runnebaum,
and Andre Knoesen, ASEV 2021'
---
Each year in the wine industry, economic loss occurs due to stuck or sluggish fermentations and the corresponding off-flavors produced. While monitoring by using
standard methods such as total soluble solids (density) may reveal a problem, often
this occurs after wine quality has already been impacted and remediation techniques
are less effective, more intrusive, and costly. The use of redox potential, or oxidation reduction potential (ORP), as a process parameter is being explored to predict
fermentation outcomes early in fermentation, even before measurable changes in
total soluble solids occur. ORP describes the tendency for molecules or ions to gain
or lose electrons in relation to the chemical makeup of a solution being measured.
Consequently, ORP values are sensitive to the fermentative activity of the yeast as
metabolic products are released and alter the chemical conditions of the solution.
This makes ORP a sensitive tool for understanding the state of the fermenting yeast
in a must, even before sugar consumption can be measured. This study aimed to
monitor ORP under varying nutrient conditions and with different yeast strains to
better understand the relationship between ORP and fermentation outcomes. Several
wine strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (EC1118, Elixir, CY3079, Montrachet, and
RC212) were observed, as well as varying pH and nutrient conditions. Preliminary ORP
data for stuck fermentations show indications of failure sooner than would a slowing
sugar consumption rate
